
LFS series - detailed annual survey results (lfsa)

Reference Metadata in Euro SDMX Metadata Structure (ESMS)

Compiling agency: Eurostat, the statistical office of the European Union


Eurostat metadata
Reference metadata
1. Contact
2. Metadata update
3. Statistical presentation
4. Unit of measure
5. Reference Period
6. Institutional Mandate
7. Confidentiality
8. Release policy
9. Frequency of dissemination
10. Accessibility and clarity
11. Quality management
12. Relevance
13. Accuracy
14. Timeliness and punctuality
15. Coherence and comparability
16. Cost and Burden
17. Data revision
18. Statistical processing
19. Comment
Related Metadata
Annexes (including footnotes)		


For any question on data and metadata, please contact: EUROPEAN STATISTICAL DATA SUPPORT		
Download

1. Contact	Top
1.1. Contact organisation	
Eurostat, the statistical office of the European Union

1.2. Contact organisation unit	
Unit F3: Labour market and lifelong learning

1.5. Contact mail address	
2920 Luxembourg LUXEMBOURG


2. Metadata update	Top
2.1. Metadata last certified	31/10/2018
2.2. Metadata last posted	31/01/2019
2.3. Metadata last update	28/01/2020

3. Statistical presentation	Top
3.1. Data description
The section 'LFS series - detailed annual survey results' reports annual results from the EU-LFS. While LFS is a quarterly survey, it is also possible to produce annual results. There are several ways of doing it, see section '18.5 Data compilation' below for details.

This data collection covers all main labour market characteristics, i.e. the total population, activity and activity rates, employment, employment rates, self-employed, employees, temporary employment, full-time and part-time employment, population in employment having a second job, population in employment working during unsocial hours, working time, total unemployment, inactivity and quality of employment.

General information on the EU-LFS can be found in the ESMS page for 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)', see link in related metadata. Detailed information on the main features, the legal basis, the methodology and the data as well as on the historical development of the EU-LFS is available on the EU-LFS (Statistics Explained) webpage.

3.2. Classification system
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').

3.3. Coverage - sector
As a general rule the EU-LFS covers all economic sectors.

3.4. Statistical concepts and definitions
The European Union Labour Force Survey (EU-LFS) provides population estimates for the main labour market characteristics, such as employment, unemployment, inactivity, hours of work, occupation, economic activity and other labour related variables, as well as important socio-demographic characteristics, such as sex, age, education, household characteristics and regions of residence.

The definitions of employment and unemployment, as well as other survey characteristics follow the definitions and recommendations of the International Labour Organisation. The definition of unemployment is further precised in Commission Regulation (EC) No 1897/2000.

For more details, please consult the EU-LFS (Statistics Explained) - Methodology.

3.5. Statistical unit
Persons.

3.6. Statistical population
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').

3.7. Reference area
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').

3.8. Coverage - Time
Data are available from 1983 onwards for the annual series.

3.9. Base period
Not applicable.


4. Unit of measure	Top
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').


5. Reference Period	Top
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').


6. Institutional Mandate	Top
6.1. Institutional Mandate - legal acts and other agreements
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').

6.2. Institutional Mandate - data sharing
Not applicable.


7. Confidentiality	Top
7.1. Confidentiality - policy
Regulation (EC) No 223/2009 on European statistics (recital 24 and Article 20(4)) of 11 March 2009 (OJ L 87, p. 164), stipulates the need to establish common principles and guidelines ensuring the confidentiality of data used for the production of European statistics and the access to those confidential data with due account for technical developments and the requirements of users in a democratic society.

7.2. Confidentiality - data treatment
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').


8. Release policy	Top
8.1. Release calendar
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').

8.2. Release calendar access
Not applicable

8.3. Release policy - user access
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').


9. Frequency of dissemination	Top
Annual.


10. Accessibility and clarity	Top
10.1. Dissemination format - News release
Not applicable.

10.2. Dissemination format - Publications
For more information on data and publications, please consult: EU-LFS - Data and publications.

10.3. Dissemination format - online database
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').

10.4. Dissemination format - microdata access
EU-LFS anonymised microdata are available for research purposes. Please refer to access to microdata.

10.5. Dissemination format - other
See: http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat

10.6. Documentation on methodology
For a detailed description of methods and concepts used, as well as for other documents related to the EU-LFS, please consult the  EU-LFS (Statistics Explained) webpage.

The EU-LFS disseminates also publications on the methodology of the survey. For more information please consult: Quality reports and methodological publications.

10.7. Quality management - documentation
See section 11.1.


11. Quality management	Top
11.1. Quality assurance
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').

11.2. Quality management - assessment
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').


12. Relevance	Top
12.1. Relevance - User Needs
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').

12.2. Relevance - User Satisfaction
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').

12.3. Completeness
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').


13. Accuracy	Top
13.1. Accuracy - overall
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').

13.2. Sampling error
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').

13.3. Non-sampling error
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').


14. Timeliness and punctuality	Top
14.1. Timeliness
There are two ways of calculating LFS annual results (see section 18.5 for details)

1) Annual averages are published along with quarter 4 data, i.e. approximately 14 weeks after the end of the year. A common Council regulation ((EC) No 577/98) establishes the timeliness of data transmissions from the National Statistical Institutes to Eurostat. This timeliness is 12 weeks after the end of the reference period, and it determines the release of data to users. The timeliness of quarterly data release to users is approximately 14 weeks after the end of reference quarter.

2) Other annual results which require further processing are published around 6 months after the end of the year.

14.2. Punctuality
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').


15. Coherence and comparability	Top
15.1. Comparability - geographical
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').

15.2. Comparability - over time
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').

15.3. Coherence - cross domain
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').

15.4. Coherence - internal
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').


16. Cost and Burden	Top
Not available.


17. Data revision	Top
17.1. Data revision - policy
Revisions of previously released data are not expected, unless major errors are identified in the data delivered or in their processing. Exceptional revisions may happen e.g. after new estimates of population from a population census.

17.2. Data revision - practice
For information on EU-LFS data revisions, please consult EU-LFS (Statistics Explained) - Data and publication. 


18. Statistical processing	Top
18.1. Source data
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').

18.2. Frequency of data collection
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').

18.3. Data collection
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').

18.4. Data validation
Please refer to the ESMS page on 'Employment and unemployment (LFS)' (see link below in section 'related metadata').

18.5. Data compilation
For each country and period, there are two ways of calculating LFS annual data:

1) Variables collected every quarter lead to quarterly results which can be averaged through the year, hence producing so-called 'annual average results'.

2) Variables collected only yearly lead directly to so-called 'annual results'. 

Due to different weighting scheme used for annual and quarterly results, annual averages and annual results might slightly differ. Annual average results are preferable because they have smaller (or exceptionally the same) sampling errors. Therefore, Eurostat publishes annual average results whenever possible, as follows: annual tables consisting exclusively of quarterly variables are always published as annual averages; annual tables consisting of a combination of annual and quarterly variables are always published as annual results. 

EU and Euro area aggregates are calculated aggregating totals from Member States. For the data expressed in absolute values for each quarter (i.e. number of persons) no weighting is used. Rates/Ratios are subsequently calculated from the data expressed in absolute values (i.e. number of persons).

18.6. Adjustment
No adjustments are made to the EU-LFS data. Please note that Eurostat also publishes LFS adjusted series under the collection 'LFS main indicators'.


19. Comment	Top
No notes.


Related metadata	Top
employ_esms - Employment and unemployment (Labour force survey)

Annexes	Top
EU-LFS (Satistics Explained) webpage (additional metadata information)
